KEP-4176: A Static Policy Option to spread hyperthreads across physical CPUs (#4177)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/4176-cpumanager-spread-cpus-preferred-policy/README.md

- [ ] (R) KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [ ] (R) Design details are appropriately documented
- [ ] (R) Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input (including test refactors)
  - [ ] e2e Tests for all Beta API Operations (endpoints)
  - [ ] (R) Ensure GA e2e tests meet requirements for [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]

> - [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

Reviewer: I guess we can ticks those once approved with a followup PR

-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

> We propose this KEP to introduce a new CPU Manager Static Policy Option that spreads hyper threads across physical cores. In this policy, we changed the cpu assignment sorting algorithm to sort by socket and then directly cpus without taking physical cores into ordering. It seems like a noisy neighbour issue, but it's always true. We will explain the reason in the motivation section. This policy is useful for some applications which need to take advantage of CPU Cache.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this KEP, we propose a new CPU Manager Static Policy Option called `distribute-cores-across-cpus` to prefer allocating cores from different physical CPUs on the same socket. This new policy is analogous to the `distribute-cpus-across-numa` policy option in that it proposes to *spread* cores allocations out, rather than pack them together. The main difference being that this new policy spreads individual core allocations across CPUs, whereas the existing policy spreads them across NUMA nodes. Such a policy is useful, for example, if an application wants to avoid being a noisy neighbor with itself, but still take advantage of the L2 cache by running its application threads on the same socket.
```

> In this KEP, we propose a new CPU Manager Static Policy Option called `distribute-cores-across-cpus` to prefer allocating cores from different physical CPUs on the same socket. This new policy is analogous to the `distribute-cpus-across-numa` policy option in that it proposes to *spread* cores allocations out, rather than pack them together. The main difference being that this new policy spreads individual core allocations across CPUs, whereas the existing policy spreads them across NUMA nodes. Such a policy is useful, for example, if an application wants to avoid being a noisy neighbor with itself, but still take advantage of the L2 cache by running its application threads on the same socket.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this KEP, we propose a new CPU Manager Static Policy Option called `distribute-cpus-across-cores` to prefer allocating CPUs from different physical cores on the same socket. This new policy is analogous to the `distribute-cpus-across-numa` policy option in that it proposes to *spread* CPU allocations out, rather than pack them together. The main difference being that this new policy spreads individual CPU allocations across cores, whereas the existing policy spreads them across NUMA nodes. Such a policy is useful, for example, if an application wants to avoid being a noisy neighbor with itself, but still take advantage of the L2 cache by running its threads on the same socket.
```

> ## Motivation
> 
> <!--
> This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals, and non-goals of
> this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
> motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
> demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.
> 
> [experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
> -->
> 
> `full-pcpus-only` was introduced to resolve the problem that different containers sharing the same physical cores which leads noisy neighbor issue. `distribute-cpus-across-numa` distributed cpus across NUMA to make sure no single worker suffers from NUMA effects more than any other, improving the overall performance of these types of applications. These two and default behavior can not meet the requirement of some applications which need to take advantage of L2 Cache. In that case, we need to spread hyper threads across physical cores, while NUMA is not a important factor. In such cases, the assumption is that the single physical core with two applications won't be always busy. So we can take advantage of CPU Cache to improve the performance of these applications. Otherwise, it still have the noisy neighbor issue.
> 
> 
> ### Goals

Reviewer 2: This is such a small change I don't think we need a separate Motivation section beyond what is stated in the summary.

```suggestion
## Goals
```

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

> - Introduce a new CPU Manager Static Policy that spreads hyper threads across physical cores without considering NUMA.

Reviewer 2: I know the terminology is not the same as what is used in, say, an OS setting, but we need to be consistent with ther terms used throughout the k8s codebase:

```suggestion
- Introduce a new CPU Manager Static Policy that spreads CPUs across physical cores without considering NUMA.
```

- Enhance application performance by taking advantage of L2 Cache.

> ### Non-Goals

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Non-Goals
```

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

> - This proposal does not aim to modify the existing CPU Manager Core Binding Policies. It focuses solely on introducing a new policy for spreading hyper threads across physical cores.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- This proposal does not aim to modify the existing CPU Manager Core Binding Policies. It focuses solely on introducing a new policy for spreading CPUs across physical cores.
```

Author: Yeah, this makes sense and I approve all related changes.

- It does not address other resource allocation or management aspects within Kubernetes.

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

> We propose to add a new `CPUManager` policy option called `spread-physical-cpus-preferred` to the static CPUManager policy. When enabled, this will trigger the CPUManager to try to allocate CPUs across physical nodes as much as possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We propose to add a new `CPUManager` policy option called `distribute-cpus-across-cores` to the static CPUManager policy. When enabled, this will trigger the CPUManager to try to allocate CPUs across physical cores as much as possible. It will not prohibit a CPU from being allocated on a core that already has a CPU allocated, but it will only resort to doing so once there is no other option.
```

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1 Bytedance Database Performance Optimization

We're running DB instances in Kubernetes and adopt default static policy in the past. While, we notice that the performance of DB instances is not stable. If an instance is under pressure, in original way, it was allocated two cpus from same physical core. However, an important pattern we notice is not always all instances are busy. After exploration, we find that the CPU cache is one bottleneck, once we spread hyper threads across physical cores, the busy instance can leverage more CPU cache and performance is improved a lot.

> #### Story 2

Reviewer: do we have another use case, or can at least generalize a bit the existing one?

Author: I don't have other cases in mind. Let me remove `story 2`

> We're running DB instances in Kubernetes and adopt default static policy in the past. While, we notice that the performance of DB instances is not stable. If an instance is under pressure, in original way, it was allocated two cpus from same physical core. However, an important pattern we notice is not always all instances are busy. After exploration, we find that the CPU cache is one bottleneck, once we spread hyper threads across physical cores, the busy instance can leverage more CPU cache and performance is improved a lot.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We're running DB instances in Kubernetes and adopt default static policy in the past. While, we notice that the performance of DB instances is not stable. If an instance is under pressure, in original way, it was allocated two CPUs from same physical core. However, an important pattern we notice is not always all instances are busy. After exploration, we find that the CPU cache is one bottleneck, once we allocate CPUs across physical cores, the busy instance can leverage more CPU cache and performance is improved a lot.
```

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer 3: (How) will we drive this new policy from alpha to general availability?

| Risk                                             | Impact | Mitigation |
| -------------------------------------------------| -------| ---------- |
| Bugs in the implementation lead to kubelet crash | High   | Disable the policy option and restart the kubelet. The workload will run but with CPU packing semantics - like it was before this new policy option was added. |

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

Current default sorting order is `sockets`, `cores` and then `cpus`. Using machine with 2 sockets, 6 cores, 12 CPUs topology as an example, default cpu ordering is [0, 6, 2, 8, 4, 10 | 1, 7, 3, 9, 5, 11].  In that case, if cpu manager plans to allocated two cpus, [0, 6] will be picked up. However, they belong to same socket, same numa node and same physical core which can not meet our case.

> In order to meet our use case, we can change sorting algorithm to sort by `socket` and then directly `cpus` without taking physical cores into ordering. In that case, we get cpu sequence [0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 | 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11]. From the topology information, we know [0, 2] will be allocated for 2 cpu container and 0 and 2 are from same socket but different physical cores. 

Reviewer 2: I think this is sufficient, but we should make sure it is tru in all cases. In ay case, we can iterate on this during implementation regardless.

Author: got it. We will at least cover enough scenarios we've seen to make sure it has good coverage

  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to maintain previous behavior?
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to make use of the enhancement?
-->

We anticipate no repercussions. The new policy option is voluntary and operates independently from the current selections.

### Version Skew Strategy

No changes needed.
<!--
If applicable, how will the component handle version skew with other
components? What are the guarantees? Make sure this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing a version skew strategy for this
enhancement:
- Does this enhancement involve coordinating behavior in the control plane and nodes?
- How does an n-3 kubelet or kube-proxy without this feature available behave when this feature is used?
- How does an n-1 kube-controller-manager or kube-scheduler without this feature available behave when this feature is used?
- Will any other components on the node change? For example, changes to CSI,
  CRI or CNI may require updating that component before the kubelet.
-->

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

<!--

> Production readiness reviews are intended to ensure that features merging into

Reviewer 4: Please add a `keps/prod-readiness/sig-node/4176.yaml` file with me (jpbetz) as PRR reviewer.

Author: done

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

<!--
Describe the consequences on existing workloads (e.g., if this is a runtime
feature, can it break the existing applications?).

Feature gates are typically disabled by setting the flag to `false` and
restarting the component. No other changes should be necessary to disable the
feature.

NOTE: Also set `disable-supported` to `true` or `false` in `kep.yaml`.
-->

For sure. The feature gate can be disabled in many ways.
- Set `CPUManager` policy to `none`
- Disable `CPUManagerPolicyAlphaOptions`
- select other policy options instead of `spread-physical-cpus-preferred`

Ongoing workloads will maintain their operations without disruption, while upcoming tasks will receive CPU allocations in accordance with the reinstated policy.

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

If we reactivate the feature after a rollback, the outcome remains unchanged. Current containers will retain their allocations, while newly created containers will be affected.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

> A dedicated e2e test will validate the preservation of the default behavior when the feature gate is turned off or when the feature is unused. This will be conducted through two distinct test scenarios.

Reviewer 4: Also test when policy option is set to `spread-physical-cpus-preferred` but `CPUManagerPolicyAlphaOptions` is disabled?

Author: good point. added.

  - Details: Inspect the kubelet configuration of the nodes: check feature gate and usage of the new option.

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

<!--
This is your opportunity to define what "normal" quality of service looks like
for a feature.

It's impossible to provide comprehensive guidance, but at the very
high level (needs more precise definitions) those may be things like:
  - per-day percentage of API calls finishing with 5XX errors <= 1%
  - 99% percentile over day of absolute value from (job creation time minus expected
    job creation time) for cron job <= 10%
  - 99.9% of /health requests per day finish with 200 code

These goals will help you determine what you need to measure (SLIs) in the next
question.
-->

Even CPU allocation algorithm is changed in this case, it won't cause any performance regression. So we don't need to define any SLOs for this feature.

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

<!--
Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
-->

- [ ] Metrics
  - Metric name:
  - [Optional] Aggregation method:

>   - Components exposing the metric:

Reviewer: let's try to figure out suitable metrics and add it here

- [ ] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details:

###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

<!--
Describe the metrics themselves and the reasons why they weren't added (e.g., cost,
implementation difficulties, etc.).
-->

N/A

### Dependencies

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->

N/A

###### Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?

<!--
Think about both cluster-level services (e.g. metrics-server) as well
as node-level agents (e.g. specific version of CRI). Focus on external or
optional services that are needed. For example, if this feature depends on
a cloud provider API, or upon an external software-defined storage or network
control plane.

For each of these, fill in the following—thinking about running existing user workloads
and creating new ones, as well as about cluster-level services (e.g. DNS):
  - [Dependency name]
    - Usage description:
      - Impact of its outage on the feature:
      - Impact of its degraded performance or high-error rates on the feature:
-->

> This applies to any machines with hyper-threading enabled.

Reviewer: I think this question is about the software/kubernetes components

Author: Got it.revised.

(e.g. probes taking a minute instead of milliseconds, failed pods consuming resources, etc.).
If any of the resources can be exhausted, how this is mitigated with the existing limits
(e.g. pods per node) or new limits added by this KEP?

Are there any tests that were run/should be run to understand performance characteristics better
and validate the declared limits?
-->
No

### Troubleshooting

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.

The Troubleshooting section currently serves the `Playbook` role. We may consider
splitting it into a dedicated `Playbook` document (potentially with some monitoring
details). For now, we leave it here.
-->

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?
N/A

###### What are other known failure modes?

The failure modes is similar to existing options. It changes the way how cpu manager allocate CPUs.
It's compatible when user switch between options, however, when the pod get rescheduled, it will follow the current static option instead of previous one. 

> Currently, in alpha version, we will think it's incompatile with other options. User should stick to this option. Compatibility issue would be resolved in future version.

Reviewer 2: We should try and make it as compatible as possible with other options in this release. I think composability of the various policy options is one of the nice things about the policy options framework. It is obviously incompatible with the `distribute-cpus-across-numa` option, but I think there is probably a logical way to make it work with the `full-cpus-only` option (e.g. by reducing the overall number of available cores in half). this would obviously mean that only half the cores are available for allocation, but then you would be able to *guarantee* that you don't have any noisy neighbors, in addition to being able to take advantage of the L2 cache.

-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

> We propose this KEP to introduce a new CPU Manager Static Policy that spreads hyper threads across physical cores. In this policy, we changed the cpu assignment sorting algorithm to sort by socket and then directly cpus without taking physical cores into ordering. It seems like a noisy neighbour issue, but it's always true. We will explain the reason in the motivation section. This policy is useful for some applications which need to take advantage of CPU Cache.

Reviewer: can this be a [policy option](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/cpu-management-policies/#static-policy-options) or _has_ to be a new policy?

Author: It should be a policy option instead of a new one. it belongs to `CPUManagerPolicyAlphaOptions `

- Enhance application performance by taking advantage of L2 Cache.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

- This proposal does not aim to modify the existing CPU Manager Core Binding Policies. It focuses solely on introducing a new policy for spreading hyper threads across physical cores.
- It does not address other resource allocation or management aspects within Kubernetes.

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

We propose to add a new `CPUManager` policy option called `spread-physical-cpus-preferred` to the static CPUManager policy. When enabled, this will trigger the CPUManager to try to allocate CPUs across physical nodes as much as possible.

> 

Reviewer: perhaps you already answer this later in the doc, but still let me ask:
ignoring the admittedly pretty ugly UX of this solution, if you need to run a pod with the aforementioned requirements and

- assuming cpumanager static policy in effect
- enable `full-pcpus-only` policy option
- double the CPU requirement (e.g. the workload actually needs say 10, you ask 20)
- assuming the pod would be QoS guaranteed of course

would this actually work?

Author: You mean make it work with in-place pod update?  If so, currently, it doesn't work. We make some changes in downstream to make cpu manager to work with in-place pod update feature. 

This proposal concentrate more on the cpu allocation policy. since `full-pcpus-only` allocates the whole physical cpu which is not expected in our scenarios.

Reviewer: I meant something simple and brutal: overspecifying the pod requirements in the pod spec before submitting to the cluster. I'm just try to fully grasp the gaps in the existing options.

Author: I see. it really depends on the node capacity. let's say node has 48 vcpus. If you  use `full-pcpus-only`，it will use 10 physical cpus. If you use the new proposed solution, it will use 20 physical cpus (each cpu only have one vcpu in use)

Reviewer: the UX is admittedly bad and this is bad for pod density. But since noisy neighborhood was mentioned in the KEP, I think we should explore this (again, suboptimal) path and most notably the interaction with other options, like `full-pcpus-only`.

Reviewer: This comment ^^^ is still relevant; we need to spell out how this option compose with the others and what we do if we have a incompatible options enabled at the same time. Probably kubelet should fail to start?
In general it will be better to make options compose - this is pretty much the expectations up until now.
If the options cannot compose, is worth explaining why in the KEP text (perhaps in the design details section)

We're running DB instances in Kubernetes and adopt default static policy in the past. While, we notice that the performance of DB instances is not stable. If an instance is under pressure, in original way, it was allocated two cpus from same physical core. However, an important pattern we notice is not always all instances are busy. After exploration, we find that the CPU cache is one bottleneck, once we spread hyper threads across physical cores, the busy instance can leverage more CPU cache and performance is improved a lot.

#### Story 2

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

> The risk associated with implementing this new proposal is minimal. It pertains only to a distinct policy option within the `CPUManager` and is safeguarded by the option's inherent security measures, in addition to the default deactivation of the `CPUManagerPolicyAlphaOptions` feature gate.

Reviewer: in case you add a new policy, however, you will need a new feature gate. Everything else still holds true

-->

[x] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

<!--
Based on reviewers feedback describe what additional tests need to be added prior
implementing this enhancement to ensure the enhancements have also solid foundations.
-->

##### Unit tests

<!--
In principle every added code should have complete unit test coverage, so providing
the exact set of tests will not bring additional value.
However, if complete unit test coverage is not possible, explain the reason of it
together with explanation why this is acceptable.
-->

<!--
Additionally, for Alpha try to enumerate the core package you will be touching
to implement this enhancement and provide the current unit coverage for those
in the form of:
- <package>: <date> - <current test coverage>
The data can be easily read from:
https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-testing-canaries#ci-kubernetes-coverage-unit

This can inform certain test coverage improvements that we want to do before
extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
-->

> - `<package>`: `<date>` - `<test coverage>`

Author: Got you. I will update it

##### Integration tests

<!--
Integration tests are contained in k8s.io/kubernetes/test/integration.
Integration tests allow control of the configuration parameters used to start the binaries under test.
This is different from e2e tests which do not allow configuration of parameters.
Doing this allows testing non-default options and multiple different and potentially conflicting command line options.
-->

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html
-->

> - <test>: <link to test coverage>

Reviewer: ditto (just report the value and defer to e2e test)

Author: @ffromani I can not find e2e coverage in the testgrid. Could you share which tab I should look at? should it be "ci-kubernetes-coverage-e2e-gci-gce"?

##### e2e tests

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html

We expect no non-infra related flakes in the last month as a GA graduation criteria.
-->

> - <test>: <link to test coverage>

Author: Sounds great. I will do

- [Feature gate][feature gate] lifecycle
- [Deprecation policy][deprecation-policy]

Clearly define what graduation means by either linking to the [API doc
definition](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/kubernetes-api/#api-versioning)
or by redefining what graduation means.

In general we try to use the same stages (alpha, beta, GA), regardless of how the
functionality is accessed.

[feature gate]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/

Below are some examples to consider, in addition to the aforementioned [maturity levels][maturity-levels].

#### Alpha

- Feature implemented behind a feature flag
- Initial e2e tests completed and enabled

#### Beta

- Gather feedback from developers and surveys
- Complete features A, B, C
- Additional tests are in Testgrid and linked in KEP

#### GA

- N examples of real-world usage
- N installs
- More rigorous forms of testing—e.g., downgrade tests and scalability tests

> - Allowing time for feedback

Author: Yes. It's updated. I only cover the `Alpha` done criteria at this moment.  To reduce confusion, I remove those unnecessary comments

You can take a look at one potential example of such test in:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/97058/files#diff-7826f7adbc1996a05ab52e3f5f02429e94b68ce6bce0dc534d1be636154fded3R246-R282
-->

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->
We only target alpha for this release.

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

<!--
Try to be as paranoid as possible - e.g., what if some components will restart
mid-rollout?

Be sure to consider highly-available clusters, where, for example,
feature flags will be enabled on some API servers and not others during the
rollout. Similarly, consider large clusters and how enablement/disablement
will rollout across nodes.
-->

In the worst case, if the logic has panic and kubelet crashes, the kubelet will restart and the workload will run with the default policy. Running workloads won't be affected.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

<!--
What signals should users be paying attention to when the feature is young
that might indicate a serious problem?
-->

> I verify the correctness by checking the kubelet log and the CPU allocation of the workload. I have not added any metrics against this new feature.

Author: That's a good idea. This is indeed something we want to monitor to give more confidence to users

> I verify the correctness by checking the kubelet log and the CPU allocation of the workload. I have not added any metrics against this new feature.

Reviewer: I'm (slowly) working into a PR to expose events for observability, but better not make this KEP depend on that. We can perhaps integrate later at beta graduation.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.
-->

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

<!--
Ideally, this should be a metric. Operations against the Kubernetes API (e.g.,
checking if there are objects with field X set) may be a last resort. Avoid
logs or events for this purpose.
-->

Examine the kubelet configuration of a node to verify the existence of the feature gate and the utilization of the new policy option.

###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

<!--
For instance, if this is a pod-related feature, it should be possible to determine if the feature is functioning properly
for each individual pod.
Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
Please describe all items visible to end users below with sufficient detail so that they can verify correct enablement
and operation of this feature.
Recall that end users cannot usually observe component logs or access metrics.
-->

- [ ] Events
  - Event Reason: 
- [ ] API .status
  - Condition name: 
  - Other field: 
- [ ] Other (treat as last resort)

>   - Details:

Reviewer: it seems we need some work. Since we fall in the cpumanager domain we can probably just use only metrics here.

Author: We use application metrics for comparison. I am not sure whether there's a solid metrics to show this or not. If we can get some cpu cache metrics, what would be helpful. The other one is how can we expose cpu allocation information to end users.

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.

The Troubleshooting section currently serves the `Playbook` role. We may consider
splitting it into a dedicated `Playbook` document (potentially with some monitoring
details). For now, we leave it here.
-->

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?
N/A

###### What are other known failure modes?
N/A
<!--
For each of them, fill in the following information by copying the below template:
  - [Failure mode brief description]
    - Detection: How can it be detected via metrics? Stated another way:
      how can an operator troubleshoot without logging into a master or worker node?
    - Mitigations: What can be done to stop the bleeding, especially for already
      running user workloads?
    - Diagnostics: What are the useful log messages and their required logging
      levels that could help debug the issue?
      Not required until feature graduated to beta.
    - Testing: Are there any tests for failure mode? If not, describe why.

> -->

Reviewer: I'd elaborate if this option makes CPU allocation failure more likely or not.
Possibly, here we should discuss incompatibility with other options (if any) that could lead to kubelet startup and/or workload admission failures.

Author: Got it. Add it

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?

> -->

Author: added.

extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
-->

- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/kubelet/cm/cpumanager`: `20231005` - `86.3%`

> new added codes would be a cpu allocation policy option. We can follow how other options are tested and add enough unit tests.

Reviewer: probably unnecessary, but this won't hurt either

https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html
-->

> No new integration tests for kubelet are planned.

Reviewer: we don't have integration tests in the kubelet for resource managers (and perhaps in general), we use a combination of unit and e2e tests. Again probably unnecessary addition but won't hurt spelling it out.

We expect no non-infra related flakes in the last month as a GA graduation criteria.
-->

> No new e2e tests for kubelet are planned.

Reviewer: I'm afraid I have to disagree here: we will need e2e test coverage for the new feature, which almost certainly mean new e2e tests. They can deferred for beta and beyond though (not alpha blocker, even though the sooner the better)

Author: Got it. I will make the e2e test available in alpha version. Then we should cover all the tests for this feature.

- [ ] API .status
  - Condition name: 
  - Other field: 
- [x] Other (treat as last resort)

>   - Details: Provide logical cpu allocation distribution across physical cores and also the cpu cache metrics from ecosystem.

Reviewer: resource managers are unfortunately poorly observable. The only ways we have fall in the
`Inspect the kubelet configuration of the nodes: check feature gate and usage of the new option.`
I think is good enough (and surely not worse) than all other changes in this area. We can think about metrics later in the graduation stage.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. Let me update it to what you suggested and I think this is feasible.

N/A

###### What are other known failure modes?

> The failure modes is similar to existing options. It changes the way how cpu manager allocate CPUs.

Reviewer: I'l defer this part to PRR reviewers. I think we may want to mention that this option should not make the cpu allocation less likely (does it?)

Author: Actually, in our downstream version, we did have an issue that reserved witholding logic has some issue and leads to few cpus available. This has been fixed and now it won't have such issues.

## Drawbacks

Let's talk about the limitation of current policies.

1. In a cluster with sparse workloads, we try to leverage as much cpu cache as we can. `full-pcpus-only` will always allocate full phsical cores and it introduces cache competition between vcpus.

2. `distribute-cpus-across-num` will evenly distribut CPU across NUMA nodes. In some cases, we want the application to be allocated in single NUMA node if possible, which gives better performance.

> Existing solutions can not address all the special needs from high peformance applications, that's why a new option is needed.

Reviewer: here we need to talk about possible negative effects of _having_ this work implemented. I'd mention code and operational complexity, which are (IMO) offseted by the benefits of having this allocation strategy.

Author: I remove this section and update the drawbacks. system wide, there's no drawbacks. workload performance wide, user may have performance regression and it depends on workload pattern
